---
layout: page
title: ADEPT Analysis
---

## What is the ADEPT Analysis Framework?
* **Defined**: For our purposes, is a set of ideas and assumptions used to organize our thinking about a system within an organization from many perspectives. [paraphrased from Information Systems [4th edition] by Steven Alter, p.43].
* The ADEPT Analysis Framework will be used to assist analysts to understand the system under examination from different perspectives.
* These perspectives are:
  * **Activities**
  * **Data**
  * **Environment**
  * **People**
  * **Technology**
* The results of this analysis will be used as the starting point for creating models of the system - both the SLDC and UML.

## Activities
* **Defined**: are the major steps for performing the business process.
* **Business Process**:
  * **Defined**: are related steps that combine to complete the business process that was designed to create value for both internal and external customers.
  * i.e., Accounts Payable is a business process whose sole function may be to track the payables to various creditors and provide information in the form of reports.
  * From our perspective, this part of the analysis can form the basis of our DFD's (Data Flow Diagrams) and Use Cases.

## Data
* Can take the form of preformatted data items, text, sound, pictures, video
* Quality and availability of information determines what activities and methods are feasible
* **Data**: are facts, images, sounds that may or may not be pertinent to a particular task
  * **Hard data**: clearly defined data generated by formal systems
  * **Soft data**: intuitive or subjective data obtained from informal means (talking to someone, opinions)
* **Information**: data whose form and content are appropriate for a specific task
* **Knowledge**: the combination of instincts, rules, ideas, that determine the actions we take and the decisions we make

## Environment
1.	**Products & Services**
* Physical things, information and services that the work system produces for its customers
  * Tangible things => bicycles, ketchup, etc.
  * Services => housekeeping, legal advice, etc.
  * Market niche => quality, cost, reliability
2.	**Competition**
* Government or private sector, number of competitors, government controls (i.e., regulatory constraints), nature of the customer, seasonal or steady throughout the year

## People/Stakeholders
* Those who enter, process, or use the information produced within the system
* **Human infrastructure**: support, training
* Questions from this perspective:
  * Is there an organization chart, and, if so, what does it look like?
  * What does the informal organizational structure look like?
  * What is the corporate culture like?
  * What is the skill level of these people? How involved are they? How committed to the process are they?
* **Users**:
  * **Defined**: the people who actually perform the steps or activities within the process
* **Customers**:
  * **Defined**: Are people who use and receive direct benefits from the products and/or services produced by the system
  * **Internal**: people within the same organization, and not necessarily in the same department, who receive benefit from the output from the system
  * **External**: people who purchase the product or service from the company
  * **Government and Other**: agencies who receive tax information and other information from the company
    * Can include external groups that receive information required by law or be membership in industry groups
* **Stakeholders**:
  * **Defined**: people with a personal stake in the system and its information who are neither customer or users:
    * **System sponsors**
    * **Champions**

## Technology
* Is the software, hardware and other tools and equipment used by the users in the performance of their tasks
* Technology is viewed as part of the infrastructure if it is shared among many work systems:
  * **Technical infrastructure**: i.e., networks
  * **Information infrastructure**: codified information that is shared across a company
* **Hardware**:
  * Bar-code scanners, computers, file servers, telecommunications equipment, networks
* **Software**:
  * Computer programs and operating systems that tell the hardware what to do
* **Other**

#### [ANAP1525 Home](../)