---
layout: page
title: LINQ Introduction
---
## Introduction
LINQ stands for **L**anguage **In**tegrated **Q**uery. This is a powerful feature of the C# language that allows SQL-Like querying of data, including data stored in a database. LINQ statements can be written in two ways: (1) Query syntax, or (2) Method syntax. These ways are not in conflict either; you can combine Query syntax and Method syntax in a single statement.

## Query Syntax
Query syntax appears, at first, to look like SQL. LINQ queries use keywords that closely resemble SQL keywords, but LINQ’s keywords act as operators in that they are used to form an expression. LINQ query operators perform specific processing acts on the objects as their “operands”. They flow together in a kind of “sequence” and end with the select.

Query syntax includes seven major clauses (five of which are the more commonly used):
* `from` clause: A query expression **must** begin with a **from** clause. Additionally, a query expression can contain sub-queries, which also **must** begin with a **from** clause
* `where` clause: The **where** clause is used in a query expression to specify which elements from the data source will be returned in the query expression
* `select` clause: In a query expression, the **select** clause specifies the type of values that will be produced when the query is executed. The result is based on the evaluation of all previous clauses and on any expressions in the **select** clause itself. A query expression must end with either a **select** clause or a **group** clause.
* `group` clause: The **group** clause returns a sequence of `IGrouping<TKey, TElement>` objects that contain zero or more items that match the key value for the group.
* `orderby` clause: In a query expression, the **orderby** clause causes the returned sequence or subsequence (group) to be sorted in either ascending or descending order. Multiple keys can be specified to perform one or more secondary sort operations.
* `join` clause: The **join** clause is useful for associating elements from different source sequences that have no direct relationship in the object model.
* `let` clause: In a query expression, it is sometimes useful to store the result of a sub-expression to use it in subsequent clauses. You do this with the **let** keyword.

### Example
An example of the flow seen in a typical LINQ query can be illustrated in the following (over-simplified) grammar:

```
from [type-name] identified in enumerable-expression
[orderby expression], ..n [{ascending / descending}]
[where boolean-expression]
[group group-object by group-obj-property [into group-identifier]]
select expression
```

## LINQPad – A Scratch-pad for LINQ
[LINQPad](http://LINQPad.net) is a stand-alone application that you cause in place of creating a sample console application to test and/or explore LINQ. The LINQPad editor window allows you to select from three main contexts:
* **Expressions**: In this context, you simply must generate an expression in the editor and run the expression. LINQPad will show the output in the Results window.
* **Statements**: Imagine lines of code in a method, and you have the Statements context. Here you write the complete program statements - declaring variables, making calculations, performing queries, writing if or flow-control statements, etc. - and LINQPad executes these like it was the body of some method call. If you want to output anything to the results window, simply call the `.Dump()` extension method that LINQPad includes for all objects.
* **Program**: This context most closely represents a console application. You are given a `Main()` method and you can add additional methods and/or classes to build a complete console-like application. In this context, however, instead of calling `Console.WriteLine(…)`, you continue to use the `.Dump()` method to output content to the Results window.

LINQPad allows you to connect to a database. Clicking “Add Connection…” opens the “Choose Data Context” dialog. Click “Next” (leaving the default) move you into the “LINQPad Connection” dialog where you specify your server name and your existing database. From there, you can see the database and its tables and columns in the explorer pane on the left.

## Setup LINQPad Database Connection
LINQPad is already installed on the Lab computers. The only setup that is needed is to create a connection to a database. When starting LINQPad for the first time no database connections are listed.

### [Unit 1 Home](linq.md)
### [DMIT2018 Home](../)