---
layout: page
title: Information Systems
---

## The Impact of Information Technology
1. The future of IT
* IT is responsible for ½ of all productivity growth and 1/3 of all economic growth between 1995 and 1999
2. The Role of Systems Analysis and Design
* **Define** – a step by step process for developing high-quality information systems
* **Information systems** – combines information technology (**processes**, **interfaces**, and **networks**), people, data that interact to:
  * Support business requirements,
  * Support and improve day to day operations (called Data processing), and to
  * Support the problem solving and decision-making needs of managements (called Information services)
3. **Purpose of an information system** – to collect, process, and exchange information
4. Who Develops information systems? (5 categories)
* IT Service Firms (consulting firms)
* Package Software Providers (off the shelf)
* Venders of Enterprise-wide solution software.  (People-Soft)
* Open Source
* In house developer

## Information Systems Components
1. System
* **System** – a set of related components that produces specific results.
* **Mission-critical system** – a system vital to a company’s operations
* Every system requires input data
2. Hardware
* Consists of everything in the physical layer of the information system.
* Can include servers, workstations, networks, telecommunications and equipment, fiber-optic cables, handheld computers, scanners, digital capture devices, etc.
3. Software
* Defined – the programs that control the hardware and produce desired results
* Consists of:
  * System software
  * Application software
    * Program applications – programs to support day to day functions
    * Enterprise applications – companywide systems such as order processing, payroll
    * Legacy systems – older systems that must be supported
  * Can include horizontal and vertical systems
    * Horizontal – inventory or payroll that can be adapted to be used in many different types of companies
    * Vertical – designed to meet industry or business objectives such as medical or video chains.
4. Data
* **Data** consists of **facts** and is the system’s raw material
* **Information** – is data that has been transferred into output valuable to users. (It has meaning)
* Data is sometimes stored in tables
5. Processes
* Are the tasks and business functions that users, managers, IT staff perform to achieve specific results?
* Are the building blocks of an information system?

## How Business Uses Information Systems
1. Enterprise Computing Systems
* Define – information systems that support company-wide operations and data management requirements (production, sales, services, accounting)
* Provides all levels of mgt information to support the decision-making process and primarily unstructured decisions.
  * Structured decisions – will follow a predictable set of rules (i.e., credit checks on customers)
  * Unstructured decisions – no precedent set of rules; unpredictable
    * Assumes that the information needed to make a decision about a unique circumstance already exists within the organization.
* Main Objective – to integrate a company’s primary functions to improve efficiency, reduce costs and help managers make key decisions
* Disadvantage – ERP systems generally impose an overall structure that might or might not match the way a company operates.
2. Transaction Processing systems
* Define – are applications that capture and process data about transactions (AKA – Data processing systems)
* Processes data generated by day-to-day business operations
* Transaction – a business event that bring new data into the business system. (orders, reservations)
  * Represents 90% of all data that must be captured; therefore, it is a major function.
  * Can be initiated from outside the organization
  * Types of transaction processing
    * Input – respond to business transactions
      * Most common form
      * Inputs new information into an IS
      * E.g., Airline reservations, payments, orders, timecards
    * Output – initiates transactions – internal and external
      * Confirms an action or triggers a response
      * E.g., airline reservation confirmation, customer invoices, sales receipts
    * Data Maintenance
      * Involves routine updates to stored data
      * E.g., change of address, discontinued products, inventory levels
    * Usually, performed by clerical workers
    * Usually, first to be replaced by automation
3. Business Support System (MIS)
* Management Reporting is needed to plan, monitor and control business operations
* Provides job- related information to users at all levels of a company
* Provides support for decisions
* Management Information System
  * Define – is an IS that provides mgt-oriented reports in a fixed format that uses predefined: Captured and processed data; Management or statistical models
  * Is intended for management: supervisors, middle managers, executives.
* Detailed Reports – information with little or no filtering
  * E.g., Listing of all customer accounts
  * Can be historical
  * Provides an audit trail
  * Assists mgt by generating schedules
  * Can be regulatory (required by government)
* Summary Reports
  * Categorization of detailed information to show trends and or potential problems
  * Can be in the form of graphics
* Exception Reports
  * Information is filtered according to some criteria – usually according to some pre-set standard – before it is used by management.
  * I.e., stock below a certain quantity
4. Decision Support Systems
* Assists with decisions (MIS is report focused)
* Can perform “what if” scenarios.
* Used by middle management and up
5. Knowledge Management Systems (Expert Systems
* A system encoded with “expert” human knowledge and experience to achieve expert levels of problem solving. Imitates the reasoning of an expert.
* Simulates human reasoning by combining a knowledge base and inference rules that determine how the knowledge is applied
  * Knowledge base – consists of a large database that allows users to find information by entering keyword or questions in normal English phrases
  * Inference rules – used by the knowledge base; are logical rules that identify data patterns and relationships
* Uses fuzzy logic to allow inferences to be drawn from imprecise relationships
* Is an extension of the DSS (decision support)

## Roles
* The **systems analyst** role focuses on the IS issues surrounding the system.
* The **business analyst** role focuses on the business issues surrounding the system.
* The **requirements analyst** role focuses on eliciting the requirements from the stakeholders associated with the new system.
* The **infrastructure analyst** role focuses on technical issues surrounding the ways the system will interact with the organization’s technical infrastructure (hardware, software, networks, and databases).
* The **Change Management analyst** role focuses on the people and management issues surrounding the system installation.
* The **project manager** role ensures that the project is completed on time and within budget and that the system delivers the expected value to the organization.


### [Theory Home](theory.md)
### [ANAP1525 Home](../)